6



     Then let not winter's ragged hand deface
     In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled:
     Make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place
     With beauty's treasure ere it be self-killed:
     That use is not forbidden usury
     Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
     That's for thyself to breed another thee,
     Or ten times happier be it ten for one;
     Ten times thyself were happier than thou art,
     If ten of thine ten times refigured thee:
     Then what could death do if thou shouldst depart,
     Leaving thee living in posterity?
     Be not self-willed, for thou art much too fair
     To be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
7



     Lo in the orient when the gracious light
     Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
     Doth homage to his new-appearing sight,
     Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
     And having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill,
     Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
     Yet mortal looks adore his beauty still,
     Attending on his golden pilgrimage:
     But when from highmost pitch, with weary car,
     Like feeble age he reeleth from the day,
     The eyes (fore duteous) now converted are
     From his low tract and look another way:
     So thou, thyself outgoing in thy noon,
     Unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.
8



     Music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly?
     Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy:
     Why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly,
     Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
     If the true concord of well-tun d sounds,
     By unions married, do offend thine ear,
     They do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds
     In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear;
     Mark how one string, sweet husband to another,
     Strikes each in each by mutual ordering;
     Resembling sire, and child, and happy mother,
     Who all in one, one pleasing note do sing;
     Whose speechless song being many, seeming one,
     Sings this to thee, `Thou single wilt prove none.'
9



     Is it for fear to wet a widow's eye
     That thou consum'st thyself in single life?
     Ah! if thou issueless shalt hap to die,
     The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
     The world will be thy widow and still weep,
     That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
     When every private widow well may keep,
     By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind:
     Look what an unthrift in the world doth spend
     Shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it,
     But beauty's waste hath in the world an end,
     And kept unused the user so destroys it:
     No love toward others in that bosom sits
     That on himself such murd'rous shame commits.
10



     For shame deny that thou bear'st love to any,
     Who for thyself art so unprovident.
     Grant, if thou wilt, thou art beloved of many,
     But that thou none lov'st is most evident;
     For thou art so possess'd with murd'rous hate,
     That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire,
     Seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate
     Which to repair should be thy chief desire:
     O change thy thought, that I may change my mind!
     Shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love?
     Be as thy presence is, gracious and kind,
     Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove:
     Make thee another self, for love of me,
     That beauty still may live in thine or thee.
11



     As fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st
     In one of thine, from that which thou departest,
     And that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st
     Thou mayst call thine, when thou from youth convertest:
     Herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase,
     Without this, folly, age, and cold decay:
     If all were minded so, the times should cease,
     And threescore year would make the world away.
     Let those whom Nature hath not made for store,
     Harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish:
     Look whom she best endowed she gave the more;
     Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish:
     She carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby,
     Thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
12



     When I do count the clock that tells the time,
     And see the brave day sunk in hideous night,
     When I behold the violet past prime,
     And sable curls all silvered o'er with white,
     When lofty trees I see barren of leaves,
     Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
     And summer's green all girded up in sheaves
     Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard:
     Then of thy beauty do I question make
     That thou among the wastes of time must go,
     Since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake,
     And die as fast as they see others grow,
     And nothing 'gainst Time's scythe can make defence
     Save breed to brave him when he takes thee hence.
13



     O that you were your self! but, love, you are
     No longer yours than you yourself here live;
     Against this coming end you should prepare,
     And your sweet semblance to some other give:
     So should that beauty which you hold in lease
     Find no determination; then you were
     Your self again after yourself's decease,
     When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
     Who lets so fair a house fall to decay,
     Which husbandry in honour might uphold
     Against the stormy gusts of winter's day
     And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
     O, none but unthrifts: dear my love, you know
     You had a father, let your son say so.

